Future space missions involving the interaction of multiple
satellites present increasingly demanding relative navigation
requirements that must be achieved autonomously using limited
onboard resources. The research presented in this paper considers a
particularly useful relative navigation scenario wherein an observing
spacecraft is navigating with respect to a target space object at large
separations (several kilometers) using only bearing angles obtained
by a single onboard camera. This so-called angles-only navigation
provides an inherently passive, robust, and high-dynamic range
capability that uses simple sensors that are already on board most
spacecraft. Furthermore, because of their low-cost, low power
consumption, and small form factor as compared with other
metrology systems like lidar and radar, these sensors enable accurate
relative navigation while complementing the current trend of
spacecraft miniaturization. Accordingly, angles-only navigation
represents a clear enabling technology for a variety of advanced
multi-satellite mission concepts. These include robust
autonomous rendezvous and docking, improved space
situational awareness, advanced distributed aperture science (see,
for example, the miniaturized distributed occulter/telescope project
in development at Stanford University), and on-orbit servicing of
noncooperative spacecraft. In line with the terminology of the
last application, this paper denotes the observing spacecraft as “the
servicer” and treats its orbit as the reference about which to describe
the relative orbital motion of the target.

The angles-only navigation problem has been explored in several
research studies, both from the perspective of developing and
evaluating the analytical framework for relative state estimation using
bearing angles and in the lens of designing and achieving in-flight
demonstrations. In general, the majority of previous literature
operates under the well-documented claim that the angles-only
navigation problem is not fully observable due to a lack of explicit
range information. The work of Woffinden and Geller clarified
this claim by providing closed-form sufficient conditions for
observability using a linearized relative motion model in rectilinear
coordinates. The conclusion was that, when formulating the anglesonly
navigation dynamical system, using purely linear models for the
dynamics and measurements yielded an unobservable system
whereby the complete relative motion state could not be
reconstructed from sequences of bearing angles. Gaias et al.
explored the use of a relative orbital element (ROE)-based
description for the relative motion, and they showed an improved
physical interpretation wherein the unobservability problems were
confined to a single state element that best approximated the
ambiguous range. Furthermore, the inclusion of the J2 perturbation
was shown to improve the mathematical metrics for observability,
namely, through the decrease of the condition number of the so-called
observability matrix. Still, the most common method employed by
researchers to mitigate the unobservability, and the one taken by
Woffinden and Geller and Gaias et al., is to conduct
designated orbital maneuvers that produce a known variation to the
natural bearing angle trends. This approach has the undesirable effect
of strongly coupling the achievable relative navigation accuracy with
the maneuver-planning task, and it must be repeated periodically to
correct filter estimate divergence. Instead, recent work by Sullivan
et al. formulated a novel procedure for angles-only navigation
that does not require designated orbital maneuvering for successful
relative motion estimation in near-circular low Earth orbit (LEO).
The authors leveraged the same ROE state as discussed previously,
and they instituted an estimation architecture that included nonlinear
effects related to the mean-to-osculating transformation when
mapping variations of the measured bearing angles to variations in
the modeled J2-perturbed relative motion. However, several
limitations existed within that research, including inconsistent filter
performance for several common relative motion configurations,
slow convergence rates for the estimation of the ROE state, and
sensitivity to the selected filter tuning parameters.

In the framework of the ARGON (advanced rendezvous
demonstration using GPS and optical navigation) and AVANTI
(autonomous vision approach-navigation and target identification)
in-flight demonstrations, the research studies of D’Amico et al.
and Gaias et al. provided compelling evidence showing that the
unobservability decoupling and practical collision-avoidance
constraints based on the E∕I-vector separation principle
enabled successful reconstruction of the ROE state in near-circular
orbits when applied in conjunction with orbital maneuvers. The
ARGON mission was able to demonstrate angles-only rendezvous
from tens of kilometers down to 2 km of separation in LEO using
ground-in-the-loop image processing and relative orbit determination.
Instead, the recently completed AVANTI mission achieved
autonomous angles-only navigation and rendezvous from tens of
kilometers to within 30 m of separation with a designated navigation
filter using the ROE to estimate the J2- and differential-dragperturbed
relative motion in LEO. These demonstrations provided
useful insight into the constraints imposed by a real-world
implementation of angles-only relative navigation.

As a final consideration, the problem of angles-only initial relative
orbit determination (IROD) is of great utility to both general space
situational awareness and to the completion of an encompassing
angles-only sequential filtering framework. An accurate and
computationally efficient IROD tool can provide the necessary
initialization to begin sequential angles-only filtering. In this context,
Sullivan et al. developed an IROD tool that used a reduced set of
ROE nondimensionalized by the relative mean longitude to estimate
the shape and orientation of the relative motion in near-circular
unperturbed orbits. That method neglected the dynamical evolution
of the reduced ROE set and required substantial measurement time
and prior knowledge on the relative separation to fully initialize the
sequential estimation of the ROE state. Instead, Geller and Lovell
explored the use of a second-order expansion of the
measurement model, combined with the linear Hill–Clohessy–
Wiltshire (HCW) dynamics model in spherical coordinates, to
provide an approximate IROD solution for unperturbed, circular
orbits. The work of Newman et al. investigated a two-part
methodology that used a linear expansion of the measurement
equations to solve for the initial state vector, which was then scaled
using a nonlinear Volterra expansion of the dynamics in circular
unperturbed orbits. Finally, the previously mentioned ARGON and
AVANTI missions relied on prior orbital knowledge of the target
provided by the North American Aerospace Defense Command’s
(NORAD’s) two-line elements (TLEs) and designated radar
campaigns, respectively, to fully initialize the estimation procedures
without using bearing angle measurements at all.

This paper primarily addresses the limitations of the previous
maneuver-free approach of Sullivan et al. through the following
main contributions to the state of the art. First, a novel deterministic
method for angles-only IROD is developed for general application in
J2-perturbed orbits of arbitrary eccentricity. The approach leverages
the ROE state in order to decouple the strongly observable relative
orbit geometry from the ambiguous range, resulting in a system of
linear equations that are analytically solved to obtain the initial
ROE unit vector. To appropriately scale the initial unit vector
solution, two options are explored. First, a second-order expansion of
the measurement equations yields a system of quadratic equations
that must be solved for the scaling factors. Instead, the second option
uses coarse prior range knowledge that is supplemented by the known
unit vector obtained from sparse imaging to arrive at the complete
initialization. This latter method is shown to reduce the amount of
bearing angle measurements required for high performance,
minimize the reliance on prior target orbit knowledge, and provide
accurate initial ROE estimates to the sequential filter without using
orbital maneuvers. Then, an innovative design procedure is
conducted with the objective of developing a completely maneuverfree
sequential state estimation architecture that yields accurate and
robust performance with minimal increase in complexity for
eccentric orbit scenarios. The filtering approach developed in this
paper is founded on nonlinear variants of the seminal Kalman filter
(KF) methodology originally presented by Rudolf Kalman
in the context of estimation for linear systems. Notably, the extended
KF (EKF) discussed by Bucy and the unscented KF (UKF)
presented by Julier and Uhlmann are considered because they
allow the powerful linear KF approach to be applied to systems with
nonlinear dynamics and/or measurement models. In an effort to retain
simplicity of the filtering frameworks, purely linear dynamics models
that capture the secular J2 perturbation effects on the mean ROE are
implemented instead of complex numerical integration methods for
nonlinear dynamics propagation. To overcome the tight observability
constraints imposed by maneuver-free angles-only navigation, the
filter measurement model retains an appropriate nonlinear mean-toosculating
orbital element transformation. In doing so, the
separation-dependent osculating characteristics of the measured
bearing angles are more effectively related back to variations in the
estimated ROE state parameters. This keen insight into the perturbed
dynamics, combined with a better capturing of the orbit curvature
through the nonlinear mapping from orbital elements to position and
velocity, is demonstrated to be the key to unlocking practical filter
improvement. With these fundamental considerations handled, the
scope of the design process transitions to improving filter accuracy
and robustness. To that end, an inventive and simplistic framework is
developed and implemented to estimate the camera sensor biases and
empirical differential accelerations in addition to the ROE. These
quantities directly supplement modeling deficiencies in the relative
orbital dynamics with a limited increase in complexity. As an
alternate design strategy, a novel adaptive angles-only filtering
framework is presented whereby the process noise statistics are tuned
online using sequences of measurement residuals to improve filter
process modeling and proactively minimize sensitivity to filter noise
statistics parameters that are instead often chosen through trial and
error. The overall result is an estimation architecture that has been
pragmatically improved to maximize the potential dynamical
observability and filtering performance while still decoupling the
navigation process from the maneuver-planning problem. Finally, the
performance of the navigation algorithms is validated in high fidelity
against rigorous numerically propagated force models, subject to
realistic constraints on sensor performance. From a practical
perspective, this accurate and robust maneuver-free angles-only
methodology enables computational- and fuel-efficient estimation
while still meeting the strict navigational requirements posed by
multi-satellite mission concepts.

After this introduction, Sec. II highlights the overall dynamical
system formulation that provides the foundation for estimating the
relative motion as encoded by a set of relative orbital elements. The
problem of filter initialization through initial relative orbit
determination is addressed in Sec. III, and the design and validation
of the maneuver-free navigation architecture are conducted in
Sec. IV. Finally, Sec. Voffers concluding remarks and lessons learned
on the topic.

The angles-only navigation problem studied in this paper involves
estimating the relative state of a target space object with respect to an
observing servicer spacecraft in eccentric orbits using only bearing
angle measurements from a camera sensor on board the servicer
spacecraft. Scenarios are considered that emulate far- to midrange
operations, with separations ranging from tens of kilometers to a few
hundred meters. Although it is assumed that the initial relative state is
unknown, there may be coarse prior information available to initialize
the navigation procedure. The estimation problem is fully posed by
the received measurements and by the choice of state to be
reconstructed.

With the filter state chosen and the observables fixed, the
foundation for the estimation problem is now formulated with an
appropriate dynamical system representation. In the general anglesonly
relative navigation problem, both the dynamics describing the
relative motion and the measurement model relating state elements
to observations are nonlinear. Accordingly, the EKF
and UKF architectures are employed because they include
modifications to the linear KF algorithm to account for nonlinear
systems. Although the UKF enables the nonlinear dynamics and
measurement models to be used directly in the estimation (via the
unscented transform), the EKF variant requires a first-order
truncation of the dynamics and measurement model Taylor series
expansions. Accordingly, this section develops the general
dynamical system representation for the estimation problem and
the linearized form necessary for the EKF architecture. In the latter
case, the time evolution of the complete estimation state is governed
by the system of differential equations.

The necessary system matrices for the relative motion state subset
will now be developed in detail under the assumption of linear
relative motion with respect to a servicer in an arbitrarily eccentric
orbit. Relative motion perturbations due to J2 and atmospheric drag
are readily captured for eccentric orbits in the STMs developed by
Koenig et al. Under the same mathematical framework as
Koenig et al., Guffanti et al. instead formulated a set of STMs
that accounted for solar radiation pressure as well as sun and moon
third-body gravity. From these works, it is possible to design a
filtering framework that leverages improved closed-form dynamics
modeling to capture the most relevant perturbations in any Earth orbit
regime. For this paper, the relative motion STM is used to incorporate
only the dominant J2 effects in eccentric orbit, which in general cause
short-period (on the order of the orbital period) and long-period (on
the order of the argument of perigee precession period) oscillations as
well as secular drifts in the orbital elements. By substituting the firstorder
averaged J2-perturbed potential into the LPE and effectively
time averaging the ROE variational equations, the secular and longperiod
effects are captured in a linear time-varying dynamics model.
As previously stated, Koenig et al. formalized a modular
procedure to build the STM for the time-varying system through a
coordinate transformation to an intermediary time-invariant system.

The structure of this STM provides insight into the evolution of
the ROE due to J2, which is useful for reconciling potential
observability issues that arise due to only using bearing angle
measurements. First, both δλ and δiy display constant drift, with the
former resulting from combined Keplerian orbital motion and J2
and the latter from only J2. Additionally, the evolution of the relative
eccentricity vector is marked by a secular drift perpendicular to the
servicer eccentricity vector and a circular precession. An
illustration of these trends is provided in Fig. 2. Although the
established dynamics model only captures these secular and longperiod
variations in the mean ROE, it will be later shown how to
incorporate the short-period oscillations in the measurement model
of the EKF and UKF.

The measurement sensitivity matrix relating ROE variations to
bearing angle variations, Cœ, is developed using the following
series of partial derivatives. Again, note that this linearized
representation is required for the EKF formulation, whereas the
UKF allows for the complete nonlinear measurement model to be
retained in the recursion.

To compute the modeled bearing angles needed in Eq. (23), it is
necessary to map the propagated ROE state to a relative position in
the servicer RTN frame and apply Eq. (22) followed by Eq. (1).
Multiple linear and nonlinear mappings were considered by Sullivan
et al. in the context of an observability assessment and anglesonly
navigation filter validation in near-circular orbits. The approach
taken in this paper leverages the insight gained from that research to
formulate the necessary mapping in an effort to maximize estimation
accuracy and potential filter observability. Accordingly, a nonlinear
mapping is chosen whereby the estimated mean ROE and the known
mean absolute orbital elements of the servicer are used to calculate
the mean absolute orbital elements of the target. These
mean absolute orbital element sets can then be converted to
corresponding osculating sets through the mean-to-osculating
transformation offered by Schaub and Junkins and
then used to compute the absolute position and velocity of the
servicer and target. Finally, the relative position is calculated and
mapped to the servicer RTN frame.

Recall that the chosen dynamics model includes only the secular and
long-period variations of the mean ROE due to J2 and neglects the
short-period oscillations characterizing the true osculating perturbed
relative motion. In general, conservative perturbations cause shortperiod
oscillations of the ROE with amplitudes proportional to δλ (the
mean separation). With regard to the J2 perturbation, this is because
short-period effects are a function of the mean argument of latitude of
the individual satellite orbits. Instead, nonconservative perturbations
cause short-period oscillations of the ROE with the amplitude
proportional to the differential ballistic coefficient (spacecraft size and
orientation). The short-period trends for conservative perturbations are
particularly obvious in Fig. 3, where a numerical simulation of a
J2-perturbed relative motion trajectory has been conducted for
illustration purposes. Note that, while qualitatively the same trends
occur for eccentric reference orbits, the results of Fig. 3 are generated
using a near-circular reference orbit (a = 7200 km and e = 0.01) for
improved visualization.

Over the simulation, the mean separation is decreased from 20 km
to nearly 0 km to demonstrate the separation-dependent variation in
the osculating ROE evolution. As evidenced in Fig. 3, the amplitudes
of the ROE short-period oscillations demonstrate a corresponding
decrease as the separation declines. Because the bearing angle
measurements are inherently osculating, it stands to reason that these
short-period characteristics necessarily encode information about the
separation that can be leveraged in the filter measurement modeling.
In addition to the immediate benefit of accounting for periodic
separation-dependent features in the relative motion, the inclusion of
the nonlinear mean-to-osculating transformation also preserves
the improved orbit curvature modeling coming from the ROE. By definition,
linearizing the transformation with respect to separation
necessarily incurs a mismodeling of the orbit curvature. Accordingly,
when combining a linear mean-to-osculating transformation with the
nonlinear mapping from osculating orbital elements to position and
velocity (which retains the improved curvature modeling), there is a
mismatch between the observed and modeled bearing angles that
precludes effective disambiguation of the separation. Instead, that
mismatch is minimized by instituting the nonlinear mean-toosculating
transformation to also retain the orbit curvature effects.
The result is a filter measurement model that better relates observed
variations in the bearing angles to variations in the full ROE state. As
an interesting illustration, one might attempt to confront the
observability problem of angles-only estimation using the Gim–
Alfriend dynamics model, which captures the evolution of
the mean OED subject to secular J2 perturbation effects in arbitrarily
eccentric orbits, and subsequently applies a linear mapping to
osculating OED followed by a linear mapping to the relative position
and velocity elements. However, because the aforementioned
mappings are linearized with respect to separation (as well as J2 in the
mean-to-osculating transformation), the same range-reconciling
benefits as the approach suggested in this paper are not obtained. As a
final example, consider that the state-of-the-art YA dynamics model
for propagating the relative translational state in eccentric orbits
entirely neglects perturbations and the curvature of the orbit, thus
precluding any functional observability improvements obtained by
characterizing the perturbed dynamical environment of the anglesonly
navigation scenario.

A proper consideration of the complete filtering procedure must
begin with an initialization of the estimated state and state covariance.
The presented initial relative orbit determination method makes use
of a batch of bearing angle measurements to estimate the initial ROE,
with a minimum of three sets (six total data points) needed to
reconstruct the six-dimensional state. The two-part algorithm is
formulated to operate in arbitrarily eccentric J2-perturbed orbits.
First, an approximate unit vector of the initial ROE state is computed.
Then, a solution for the unknown factor that appropriately scales that
unit vector is sought using a second-order expansion of the nonlinear
measurement model.

Recall that Gaias et al. presented results indicating that the
observability problem was largely decoupled and that the range
ambiguity was well-captured by a single state element δλ. This was
further explored by Sullivan et al., where the IROD approach in
that paper used a reduced set of ROEs that were scaled by δλ to
approximately capture the shape and orientation of the relative
motion but not the scale. Leveraging the intuition gained from these
previous two works, this section is motivated by the fact that a unit
vector should exist that accurately describes the shape and direction
of the initial ROE, subject only to an unknown scaling factor.
Consider the nonlinear measurement model in Eq. (1). With some
algebraic manipulation, it is possible to rearrange this exact model in
a linear form with respect to the camera frame relative position, and
thus with respect to the RTN frame relative position.

At this stage, the necessary dynamical system framework has been
established and the method for filter initialization has been formulated
and tested. The following sections highlight the design and validation
of an estimation architecture that is better suited to handle the generally
weak observability and corresponding numerical sensitivity associated
with angles-only navigation. Unlike several previous approaches in
angles-only navigation, the algorithms presented here are able to
operate without the need for maneuvers dedicated to observability
improvement. As a motivation, consider that such a filter architecture
effectively decouples the navigation and maneuver-planning processes
and enables more fuel-efficient rendezvous by removing the need for
frequent observability maneuvers. This design procedure addresses the
aforementioned shortcomings in the maneuver-free filter design
originally presented by Sullivan et al. for near-circular orbits. The
pragmatic improvements are achieved by systematically formulating a
filter architecture that is able to make better use of relative motion
variations induced by the perturbed dynamical environment while
additionally estimating useful parameters that aid in improved
convergence speed, consistency, and robustness for relevant orbital
geometries.

The EKF is considered as the baseline filter architecture to
estimate the ROE state, both for its ubiquity in space navigation
applications and to maintain consistency with previous works.
As previously mentioned, the nonlinear dynamics and/or
measurement models are accommodated in the EKF by performing
a linear Taylor series expansion at each estimation step. Although
the EKF allows for direct application of the nonlinear dynamics
model in the estimate time-update (or prediction) step, the
previously established STM solution is adopted for its ease of
implementation and to avoid computationally expensive numerical
integration within the filter. As an illustration of the latter
advantage, the computational runtimes for multiple state-of-the-art
STMs (including the one implemented in this work) were shown in
to be several orders of magnitude smaller than numerical
integration of high-fidelity nonlinear dynamics. The nonlinear
measurement model in Eq. (1) is retained for the measurementupdate
(or correction) step, and the associated linearization in
Eq. (11) is only used to compute the Kalman gain and state
covariance update. Instead, the strategic choice to implement the
UKF is largely founded in its ability to retain the nonlinear
measurement model through all phases of the filtering procedure at
practically no extra cost in computational complexity. As
previously discussed, accounting for nonlinear model characteristics
(particularly those related to osculating effects) improves the
filter’s ability to map separation-dependent variations in the
measured bearing angles to ROE variations that capture range
information. The UKF forgoes linearizing the measurement model
Taylor series by implementing a stochastic weighted regression
procedure. As an improvement to address sensor errors and
dynamics modeling deficiencies in the EKF, an augmented-state
EKF (AS-EKF) that estimates the sensor biases and empirical
differential accelerations is also presented and compared against the
baseline architecture. Finally, adaptive forms of the EKF and UKF
are formulated to estimate the process noise statistics online in an
effort to improve filter stability and performance over a variety of
orbit scenarios.

The filter designs are assessed for three nominal relative orbit (RO)
scenarios that emulate phases of a rendezvous operation. Servicer
absolute orbit initial conditions are given by Eq. (39) and the initial
mean ROE test cases describing each of the relative orbit trajectories
are provided in Table 3. RO1 is representative of a far-range hold
point at initial mean along-track separation of 30 km. RO2 introduces
a small difference in the semimajor axis, which enables the servicer to
approach the target on a naturally drifting relative trajectory. RO3
describes a leader–follower configuration with a purely along-track
separation of 5 km.

For each test case, the position and velocity of the servicer and target
are numerically propagated using rigorous full-force models,
including the GRACE Gravity Model 01S (GGM01S) of order and
degree 120, a Harris–Priester atmospheric drag model, third-body sun
and moon gravity, and solar radiation pressure with a cylindrical Earth
shadow model. For an in-depth discussion of this simulation tool, the
work by Eddy et al. is recommended. This simulated truth
trajectory is then used to generate simulated bearing angles and Global
Positioning System (GPS) position/velocity/time solutions that are
augmented with additive noise. Recall that Table 1 shows the noise
statistics for the bearing angle measurements and biases, as well as the
servicer’s orbit and attitude knowledge. The bearing angle and attitude
noise parameters are consistent with the Blue Canyon Technologies
star tracker and attitude determination system, and the absolute
orbit noise parameters are consistent with GPS weak signal tracking in
eccentric orbit. Finally, the numerically propagated position and
velocity of the servicer and target are transformed to corresponding
osculating orbital element sets and then numerically averaged to produce the mean
elements subject to the above perturbations. Finally, the reference truth
ROE are assembled from the numerically computed mean elements
according to Eq. (2). All estimation errors are calculated by
differencing the output mean ROE of the estimation algorithm from the
numerical truth ROE set. To evaluate filter convergence and
performance, the estimation error statistics (mean and standard
deviation) for each filter test are computed over the last three simulated
orbits and tabulated in Tables 4 and 5.

The selection of Kalman filter process and measurement noise
statistics is of interest because it is known that these features can largely
influence the filter stability and performance, particularly for nonlinear
variants like the EKF and UKF. Process noise is generally included to
account for dynamics that are unmodeled by the filter, as well as to aid
in stability by keeping the filter receptive to new measurements. As
such, a proper selection of process noise statistics could arguably
preclude augmenting the estimation state with differential empirical
accelerations. The measurement noise statistics are implemented to
account for sensor mismodeling in the filter, and they can often be
accurately determined by hardware testing. The intent of this section is
to develop a mathematical framework for a class of adaptive nonlinear
filters that are able to tune the process and/or measurement noise
statistics online. This design consideration is founded on the strategy
that more accurately accounting for the dynamical processes through
an adaptive method can help overcome observability issues related to
mismodeling and linearization, and thus mitigate numerical sensitivity
and inconsistent filter performances.
Adaptive filtering frameworks have been established in several
previous research studies. Most notably, Mehra developed
the mathematical foundation for four main categories of adaptive
filtering methodologies: namely, the Bayesian, maximum likelihood,
correlation matching, and covariance matching techniques. Meyers
and Tapley further expanded upon the covariance matching
technique, and they discussed numerical results in the context of
ground-based tracking of LEO satellites. Other research applications
for adaptive estimation have been explored in terrestrial target
tracking by Maybeck et al., in spacecraft attitude determination
by Mehra et al., and in spacecraft relative navigation using
carrier-phase differential GPS by Busse et al.. In the following,
an adaptive approach is designed for angles-only relative navigation
using the innovation covariance matching technique.
In Kalman filtering, the term innovation is generally used to
describe the residual formed by the difference between a
measurement received by the filter and the expected measurement
conditioned on the current state estimate. Alternatively, the term prefit
residual is commonly used in spacecraft orbit determination.

This research has addressed the problem of developing filter
algorithms that do not require maneuvering to estimate the
relative orbital motion of a target space object with respect to an
observing spacecraft using only bearing angles received by the
servicer onboard camera. As part of the estimation architecture
development, the problem of angles-only initial relative orbit
determination was addressed to provide an initialization to the
sequential navigation filter. Unlike other approaches that constrain
the initial relative orbit determination problem to circular
unperturbed orbits, the method in this paper was formulated for
implementation in eccentric J2-perturbed orbits. Although the
approach was shown to accurately capture the unit vector
associated with the initial relative orbital element state, the solution
for the necessary scaling factor to complete the unique initialization
suffered from the simplifying assumptions used to attempt a linear
least-squares solution. Still, the definitive advantages of the new
solution procedure were evidenced by the consistent initialization
accuracy for a multitude of relative motion geometries while
requiring less total measurement time and only relying on coarse
range knowledge with kilometer-level error.
With regard to the sequential estimation architectures developed in
this work, several key lessons were learned. First, in assessing the
ability of the extended Kalman filter to estimate the relative orbital
element state, inconsistent performances for several relative motion
scenarios provided a strong indication that the dynamics and
measurement model linearizations required by the extended KF
(EKF) substantially limited the achievable observability and,
accordingly, the filter consistency and accuracy. From there,
augmenting the estimation state to include empirical accelerations
and sensor biases that supplement the truncated process and
measurement models in the EKF yielded incremental improvements
in the filter performance for relative motion cases that plagued the
original design implementation. Although the augmented-state EKF
still demonstrated distinct inconsistency and slow convergence in
estimating the relative orbital element (ROE) and sensor biases for
the majority of simulated orbital geometries, the improved filter
convergence speed for relative orbit geometries with a difference in
semimajor axes suggested that an alternative method to supplement
the filter process model could improve the overall estimation
capability. Accordingly, an adaptive variant of the EKF that tuned the
process noise statistics online was developed and validated. The
adaptive EKF did not show substantial improvement over the
augmented-state EKF. Instead, by leveraging the ability to forgo
measurement model linearization while retaining the simplicity of
linear dynamics in the unscented Kalman filter framework, the filter
performance showed distinct stability and performance advantages in
cases where there was not a large variation of the relative motion due
to a nonzero difference in the semimajor axis. This was largely due to
the unscented KF (UKF) ability to accurately correlate nonlinear
separation-dependent osculating and orbit curvature effects observed
in the bearing angle measurements to improved separation-rectified
variations in the relative motion. This deeper systematic inclusion of
perturbed relative motion effects in the measurement model was
entirely enabled by the use of mean relative orbital elements as the
filter state parameterization. With the filter stability issues resolved,
the design process moved toward improving convergence speed and
accuracy. Thus, the strategic choice was made to supplement the
linearized dynamics model with adaptive process noise tuning. This
adaptive UKF outperformed every other variant across the board
(including in the particularly difficult pure along-track separation
case), estimating the ROE state and sensor biases to higher accuracy
with faster convergence than previous designs and with formal
covariances that accurately reflected the true error trends. The results
conclusively demonstrated that a systematic method for capturing the
nonlinear effects of orbit curvature and dominant perturbations in a
filter measurement model, combined with supplementation of an
efficient linear dynamics model by adaptive process noise tuning,
enabled improved maneuver-free angles-only navigation in eccentric
orbits.
